Sarcofago was a Brazilian extreme metal band. They were fronted by Sepultura's original singer, Wagner Lamounier, and Geraldo Minelli.

The front cover of the band's debut album, I.N.R.I., is regarded as a great influence on black metal's corpse paint style make-up.That record is also considered one of the "first wave" albums that helped shape the genre. Their second LP, The Laws of Scourge, was one of the first technical death metal records to be released.

The band broke up in 2000, after releasing the Crust EP. Former members, minus Wagner, played throughout Brazil in 2006 under the moniker Tributo ao Sarcofago. In 2009, rumors surfaced that the original I.N.R.I. line-up were reuniting for a small, high-profile tour, but proved to be false.A reissue of their back catalogue is in the works, a joint effort between Cogumelo Records and American label Greyhaze.

History
Early days (1985–1988)
Sarcofago was formed in 1985 in Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.Equally indebted to Finnish hardcore punk and early extreme metal groups such as Bathory, Celtic Frost, and Slayer. Sarcofago's goal was to create the most aggressive music ever.Wagner Lamounier, who parted acrimoniously from Sepultura in March of that same year, was invited to join the band.Although Sepultura never recorded anything with Lamounier, he contributed the lyrics to the song "Antichrist" on their Bestial Devastation EP. Sarcofago's vinyl debut was on the Cogumelo Producoes split album Warfare Noise I, originally released in 1986. Sarcofago contributed the three tracks "Recrucify", "The Black Vomit" and "Satanas". Their music and lyrics were considered shocking at the time, something which brought them a considerable amount of attention. The band's line-up at that point consisted of "Butcher" (guitars), "Antichrist" (Lamounier; vocals), "Incubus" (Geraldo Minelli; bass) and "Leprous" (Armando Sampaio; drums).

With new drummer "D.D. Crazy"—hailed as a pioneer in the metal world for his extensive use of blast beats on this album— Sarcofago released I.N.R.I in July 1987.The band's attire on the album's cover —corpsepaint, leather jackets, and bullet belts— is considered the first definite statement of black metal's visual presentation and style.The music has been equally influential, a milestone in the development of the genre.Despite the record's now-legendary status, Lamounier was unsatisfied with the end results, voicing complaints over the quality of the recording sessions and the band being plagued by inner strife. After the release of I.N.R.I., Sarcofago briefly disbanded. Lamounier moved to Uberlandia to study economics at the Federal University of Uberlandia (UFU), while Butcher and his brother D.D. Crazy left the group.The latter would play drums on Sextrash's debut, 1989's Sexual Carnage.

Rotting (1989–1990)
When Rotting first came out it stirred a huge amount of controversy due to its cover art — a traditional grim reaper figure licking what appears to be Jesus Christ's face. It was based upon a medieval painting. The cover artist himself, Kelson Frost, refused to paint a crown of thorns over the man's head, which would readily identify him as the Christian messiah.

Rotting musically differs from the raw, hyper-speed black metal of I.N.R.I. Session drummer "Joker" brought a different set of influences to the band (such as crossover thrash); Wagner also learned to play guitar in record time, and contributed many of the album's guitar riffs.Rotting also marked their first change of aliases: the group's core duo renamed themselves "Wagner Antichrist" and "Gerald Incubus". Their visual department went through changes as well — they dropped the arm and leg spikes because they made playing live difficult.

Rotting was Sarcofago's first release to have international distribution, handled in Europe by British label Music for Nations, and by Maze/Kraze in America. Maze Records released a censored version of Rotting, blacking out the original cover and adding a sticker which read "Featuring the Original Lead Singer of Sepultura" without consulting the band. Infuriated by the label's actions, Sarcofago sued them.

The Laws of Scourge (1991–1993)
Next came The Laws of Scourge (1991), considered a "revolution" in the band's career,and it is also considered to be one of the first technical death metal records. A combination of better musicianship,improved production values, and more sophisticated songwriting landed them into technical death metal territory.Sarcofago's new direction in music was partly influenced by new members Fabio "Jhasko" (guitar) and Lucio Olliver (drums),and inspired by a newer crop of extreme metal bands such as Godflesh, Paradise Lost, Bolt Thrower, Deicide, and Morbid Angel.

The Laws of Scourge became Sarcofago's best selling record, and responsible for their most extensive touring schedule to this date.Their tour trek also included their first international dates: they visited South American countries such as Peru and Chile, and in Europe they played shows in Portugal and Spain.In Brazil, their most important gig was to open for Texas crossover thrash pioneers the Dirty Rotten Imbeciles in Sao Paulo.

Hate (1994–1996)
Musically speaking, Hate is notable for its stripped-down, straightforward approach and the use of a drum machine,the latter sparking some controversy.Lamounier claimed to have no qualms about using this device, on the basis that most death metal drummers use trigger pads for recording purposes, which in the end produces the same homogenized sound as that of a drum machine.

The band cut their hair short, in protest of the masculine long hair style becoming popular due to the massive success of grunge in the early 1990s.Men sporting long hair has traditionally been associated with counterculture groups, and it is especially present in the metalhead subculture.Wagner declared:

	"Every douchebag around is wearing long hair, Nirvana and Pearl Jam T-shirts, etc. We have nothing against these bands, but we have against jumping the bandwagon. It's not right when it becomes a trend, because massification dumbs people down."	
In late 1996, Sarcofago released the Decade of Decay compilation which, amongst other things, featured demo versions of their early songs and rare backstage photographs. The band described the CD as a "gift" to their fans.

The Worst (1997–2000)
Sarcofago's fourth and final album, The Worst (1997), sees the band slowing down in relation to the speed-oriented Hate, and having a better grasp of drum programming. Minelli and Lamounier saw this record as a "summation" of their career.

With the turn of the millennium came the Crust EP, Sarcofago's swansong release. It was meant to be a preview of an upcoming album, but the band's core duo parted ways before commencing its recording.

Sarcofago Tribute tour (2006–2009)
In celebration of the 20th anniversary of the Warfare Noise split album, Cogumelo Records and Gerald Incubus organized a comeback show with Sarcofago in Belo Horizonte.Along with Minelli, the line-up for that event was Fabio Jhasko on guitars, Manu Joker and old-time friend Juarez "Tibanha" on vocals.That performance was recorded and there are plans to release it in DVD format. Lamounier opted not to join this "Sarcofago Tribute" band for the lack in desire to play professionally.However, Wagner still pursues his musical interests — he plays in the crust punk band Commando Kaos.

In October 2007,Sarcofago flew to Santiago, Chile to play in the Black Shadows Festival, alongside death metal pioneers Possessed.

In March 2009, Wagner supposedly announced that Sarcofago would reunite, and their tour itinerary would include appearances at the Wacken Open Air and Hole in the Sky festivals, as well as dates in London, New York, Los Angeles and Tokyo. He stated it would be the original I.N.R.I. line-up, but that this would be the only tour they would be doing and there would be no new material.A couple of days later, Lamounier himself wrote to the music press exposing this news report as a hoax.