Sepultura was formed in 1984 in Belo Horizonte, the capital city of Minas Gerais, Brazil.The band was founded by teen brothers Max and Igor Cavalera, the impoverished sons of Vania, a model, and Graciliano, a well-to-do Italian diplomat whose fatal heart attack left his family in financial ruin.Graciliano's death deeply affected his sons, inspiring them to form a band after Max heard the album Black Sabbath Vol. 4 the very same day. They chose the band name Sepultura, the Portuguese word for "grave", when Max translated the lyrics of the Motorhead song "Dancing on Your Grave".

The brothers' early influences included Led Zeppelin, Black Sabbath and Deep Purple, and metal and hard rock artists of the early 1980s, such as Van Halen, Iron Maiden, Motorhead, AC/DC, Judas Priest, Ozzy Osbourne and V8.They would travel to a record shop in Sao Paulo that mixed tapes of the latest records by American bands.Their listening habits changed dramatically after being introduced to Venom. As Igor Cavalera put it:

"I remember the first time I listened to Venom, it was on a friend's borrowed tape. It was similar to Motorhead, only a lot heavier. I remember someone saying: it's the devil's Motorhead! After we got acquainted with Venom, we stopped listening to Iron Maiden and all that lighter stuff.	”
The Cavalera brothers started listening to bands such as Hellhammer, Celtic Frost, Kreator, Sodom, Slayer, Megadeth, Exodus and Exciter.They also had influences on Brazilian metal from bands like Stress, Sagrado Inferno and Dorsal Atlantica. By 1984, they had dropped out of school.After several early membership changes, Sepultura established a stable lineup of Max on guitar, Igor on drums, vocalist Wagner Lamounier, and bassist Paulo Jr.Lamounier departed in March 1985 after disagreements with the band, and moved on to become the leader of the pioneering Brazilian black metal band Sarcofago. After his departure, Max took over the vocal duties. Jairo Guedes was invited to join the band as lead guitarist.

Bestial Devastation and Morbid Visions (1984–1986)

After about a year of performing, Sepultura signed to Cogumelo Records in 1985. Later that year, they released Bestial Devastation, a shared EP with fellow Brazilian band Overdose. It was self-produced and recorded in just two days. The band recorded their first full-length album, Morbid Visions, in August 1986. It contained their first hit, "Troops of Doom", which gained some media attention. The band then decided to relocate to the larger city of Sao Paulo.

Schizophrenia, Beneath the Remains and Arise (1987–1992)

In early 1987, Jairo Guedz quit the band. Guedz was replaced by Sao Paulo-based guitarist Andreas Kisser,[27] and they released their second studio album, Schizophrenia, in 1987. The album reflected a stylistic change towards a more thrash metal-oriented sound, while still keeping the death metal elements of Morbid Visions. Schizophrenia was an improvement in production and performance, and became a minor critical sensation across Europe and America as a much sought-after import. The band sent tapes to North America(USA) that made radio playlists at a time when they were struggling to book gigs because club owners were afraid to book them due to their style.[21] The band gained attention from Roadrunner Records who signed them and released Schizophrenia internationally before seeing the band perform in person.[26][28]

During a May 2018 interview with teenyrockers.com, Kisser noted that Sepultura would not have been possible without family support, not only from his own family but also from the families of Max & Igor and Paulo.[29]

The band's third studio album, Beneath the Remains, was released in 1989. The album was recorded in a rustic studio in Rio de Janeiro while the band communicated through translators with the American producer Scott Burns.[21] It was an immediate success and became known in thrash metal circles as a classic on the order of Slayer's Reign in Blood.[28] It was hailed by Terrorizer magazine as one of the all-time top 20 thrash metal albums,[30] as well as gaining a place in their all-time top 40 death metal records.[31] AllMusic gave the album 4.5 stars out of 5 and said, "The complete absence of filler here makes this one of the most essential death/thrash metal albums of all time."[32] A long European and American tour furthered the band's reputation, despite the fact that they were still very limited English speakers. Their first US show was held on October 31, 1989 at the Ritz in New York City, opening for Danish heavy metal band King Diamond. The band filmed its first video for the single "Inner Self".

Traveling on trains. Getting beat up by cops. Sleeping behind the stage. It's part of growing up. It's part of the nature of this stuff. If you don't have that kind of background, you can't be a band like us.
Max Cavalera reflecting on Sepultura's past in Brazil.[21]
In January 1991, Sepultura played for more than 100,000 people at the Rock in Rio II festival. The band relocated from their native Brazil to Phoenix, Arizona in 1990, obtained new management, and recorded the album Arise at Morrisound Studios in Tampa, Florida.[21] By the time the album was released in March 1991, the band had become one of the most critically praised thrash/death metal bands of the time. The first single "Dead Embryonic Cells" was a success, and the title track gained additional attention when its video was banned by MTV America due to its apocalyptic religious imagery. The album was critically acclaimed and their first to chart on the Billboard 200, reaching No. 119.[33]

Max Cavalera married the band's manager Gloria Bujnowski during this period.[26] In 1992, Sepultura was part of two major tours: Helmet/Ministry and Alice in Chains/Ozzy Osbourne.In early 1987, Jairo Guedz quit the band. Guedz was replaced by Sao Paulo-based guitarist Andreas Kisser,
and they released their second studio album, Schizophrenia, in 1987. The album reflected a stylistic change towards a more thrash metal-oriented sound, while still keeping the death metal elements of Morbid Visions. Schizophrenia was an improvement in production and performance, and became a minor critical sensation across Europe and America as a much sought-after import. The band sent tapes to North America(USA) that made radio playlists at a time when they were struggling to book gigs because club owners were afraid to book them due to their style.The band gained attention from Roadrunner Records who signed them and released Schizophrenia internationally before seeing the band perform in person.

During a May 2018 interview with teenyrockers.com, Kisser noted that Sepultura would not have been possible without family support, not only from his own family but also from the families of Max & Igor and Paulo.

The band's third studio album, Beneath the Remains, was released in 1989. The album was recorded in a rustic studio in Rio de Janeiro while the band communicated through translators with the American producer Scott Burns.It was an immediate success and became known in thrash metal circles as a classic on the order of Slayer's Reign in Blood.It was hailed by Terrorizer magazine as one of the all-time top 20 thrash metal albums,as well as gaining a place in their all-time top 40 death metal records.AllMusic gave the album 4.5 stars out of 5 and said, "The complete absence of filler here makes this one of the most essential death/thrash metal albums of all time."A long European and American tour furthered the band's reputation, despite the fact that they were still very limited English speakers. Their first US show was held on October 31, 1989 at the Ritz in New York City, opening for Danish heavy metal band King Diamond. The band filmed its first video for the single "Inner Self".

Traveling on trains. Getting beat up by cops. Sleeping behind the stage. It's part of growing up. It's part of the nature of this stuff. If you don't have that kind of background, you can't be a band like us.
Max Cavalera reflecting on Sepultura's past in Brazil.
In January 1991, Sepultura played for more than 100,000 people at the Rock in Rio II festival. The band relocated from their native Brazil to Phoenix, Arizona in 1990, obtained new management, and recorded the album Arise at Morrisound Studios in Tampa, Florida.By the time the album was released in March 1991, the band had become one of the most critically praised thrash/death metal bands of the time. The first single "Dead Embryonic Cells" was a success, and the title track gained additional attention when its video was banned by MTV America due to its apocalyptic religious imagery. The album was critically acclaimed and their first to chart on the Billboard 200, reaching No. 119.

Max Cavalera married the band's manager Gloria Bujnowski during this period.In 1992, Sepultura was part of two major tours: Helmet/Ministry and Alice in Chains/Ozzy Osbourne.

Chaos A.D., Nailbomb and Roots (1993–1996)

Sepultura's fifth album, Chaos A.D., was released in 1993. It saw a departure from their death metal style,adding influences of groove metal,industrial and hardcore punk. While Chaos A.D. is not a death metal album, the album does include elements of thrash metal music.AllMusic gave the album 4.5 stars out of 5 and wrote that, "Chaos A.D. ranks as one of the greatest heavy metal albums of all time."In 1994, Max and Igor collaborated with Alex Newport of Fudge Tunnel to form Nailbomb. They released an even more industrial-oriented album, Point Blank the same year. The group performed only one full live gig at Dynamo Open Air in 1995, and the performance was released as Proud to Commit Commercial Suicide. Nailbomb was disbanded shortly afterwards.

Sepultura's sound change continued with their sixth album, Roots, which was released in 1996. On this album the band experimented with elements of the music of Brazil's indigenous peoples, and adopted a slower, down-tuned sound. The album was hailed as a modern-day heavy metal classic and a major influence on the then-nascent nu metal scene. AllMusic gave it 4.5 stars out of 5 and said, "Roots consolidates Sepultura's position as perhaps the most distinctive, original heavy metal band of the 1990s."In 1996, Sepultura performed "War (Guerra)" for the AIDS benefit album Silencio=Muerte: Red Hot + Latin produced by the Red Hot Organization.

Departure of Max Cavalera (1996–1997)

In August 1996, Sepultura played on the Castle Donington Monsters of Rock main stage alongside Ozzy Osbourne, Paradise Lost, Type O Negative, Biohazard and Fear Factory. The band was suddenly a three-piece with Andreas Kisser taking over on lead vocals, after Max Cavalera left the concert site earlier in the day upon learning of the death of his stepson Dana Wells in a car accident. After Dana Wells' funeral was finished, Max returned and continued to tour with Sepultura. A few months after Wells' death, the band had a meeting with Max and said that they wanted to fire their manager Gloria Bujnowski, who was Max's wife and Dana's mother, and find new management. Their reasoning was that Bujnowski was paying too much attention to Max and not enough to the rest of the band. Max, who was still coming to terms with the death of Wells, felt betrayed by his bandmates for wanting to rid of Bujnowski and abruptly quit the band.Max Cavalera's final performance with Sepultura was at Brixton Academy in England on December 16, 1996. 

I started Sepultura back in the day. I used to write that name on my schoolbooks. What I'm going through now, is like watching my own son die. I cry every day, I feel hurt, sad, angry, it's like half of me has died.
Max Cavalera explaining his feelings on leaving Sepultura.
In an interview with Faceculture in 2010, Max Cavalera explained that one of the reasons he left Sepultura was that Kisser's wife attempted to arrange Dana Wells' funeral before he and Bujnowski could return home from England. Max also claimed that he had recently attempted to reach out to Kisser for a possible reunion in which Bujnowski could manage him and Igor Cavalera while Kisser and Paulo Jr could be managed by someone else, but Kisser rejected the plan.

